---
Title: Reflections on the state of nature
Date: 2020-12-04
Category: notes
Status: published
Tags: climate-change, sustainability
---

{% import 'post-macros.html' as macros %}


For a long time I have been deeply worried about the looming threat of climate
change and its broad consequences. But greenhouse gas emissions from human
activities are just one part of a complex picture in which we (human beings)
are damaging our environment so severely that the future of our life on Earth
uncertain, and this uncertainty is within the timescale of our children's
lifetimes. Indeed, there is some degree of consensus that we are heading for
some form of [societal collapse][deepadaptation]. In this note, I wanted to try
and articulate the complex picture of human impacts on nature as a way to
reflect on the situation in which we find ourselves in, and provide something to
navigate the stream of environmental bad news that we receive. The information
in this note is drawn primarily from recent significant reports that focus on
global impacts, linked at the end.


## Nature's biodiversity and ecosystem services

<!-- Species / biodiversity loss
- Since 1970, 81% of inland wetland species populations and 36% of coastal and marine species have declined.
- pollinators: >75% global food crop types rely on animal pollination
- TODO: level of insect extinction?
-->

Nature is the rich variety of life and environments found on Earth, but because
of human impacts it is in decline.
<!---->
The [2019 UN Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services][un-bes] is the work of an intergovernmental body and represents the
[most comprehensive assessment][un-bes-blog] of life on earth ever completed.
The report finds that human activities have caused huge declines in
terrestrial, freshwater and marine environments. Across an estimated eight
million known animal and plant species, approximately one million are currently
threatened with extinction. This rate of extinction is estimated to be 10 to
100 times higher than any of the previous known five mass extinction events in
the history of Earth, thus it has been named the [Holocene
extinction][wiki-holocene-extinction], characterising the current geological
epoch.

The [WWF Living Planet Report 2020][wwf-living-planet] provides a similarly
stark assessment of the state of the world's ecosystems and lifeforms: between
1970 to 2016 there was been an average decline of 68% in populations of
mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles and fish according to the 'Living Planet
Index', which aggregates data from 20,811 populations representing 4,392 species
globally and does not include insects. Rates of decline vary significantly by
region, with the highest average declines in tropical regions (94% of
vertebrate populations in Latin America and the Caribbean).

A [2018 study][biomass-distribution] [found][biomass-distribution-summary] that
of all mammals on Earth, 96% are livestock, 36% are humans and only 4% are wild
animals. Of birds, 70% are poultry and 30% are wild. These proportions
correspond to intensification of animal agriculture with losses of 83% of wild
terrestrial mammals, 80% of marine mammals, 50% of plants and 15% of fish.

The issues of biodiversity and ecosystems are central to the functioning of our
planet and to our health and wellbeing. Biodiversity relates to the variety of
genes, species and functional traits in an [ecosystem][ecosystems], which is
defined as a community of living things in an environment, all interacting as a
system. It is recognised that biodiversity affects the functioning of
ecosystems, the flows of energy, materials, minerals, and water. At a [high
level][ecosystem-functioning], all ecosystems are powered by the sun's energy
that is captured by photosynthesis, and this energy is transferred upwards
through the food web. The movement of nutrients occurs as living organisms
exchange them though their interactions with the physical environment.

Humans too are part of an ecosystem, depending on plants and organisms to
capture the sun's energy and convert it into edible products. However, human
activities such as agriculture and forestry management can be seen as ways of
manipulating our ecosystems to increase the output of particular provisions.
Unfortunately, such interventions have effects that are detrimental to other
aspects of ecosystem functioning.

Apart from the wonder and beauty of the natural world and a sense that it
should be respected and preserved, biodiversity can be viewed through a more
functional lens as [providing services][biodiversity-loss-humanity] for the
benefit of humans, and indeed our survival. These ecosystem services can be
[broken down into four groups][fao-eco-services]: provisioning, regulating,
support and cultural, summarised in the following table. According to the
Global Assessment Report, the trend of 16 of these 19 categories is that
decline over the last 50 years. Only energy, food, and raw materials have seen
increases in the level of provisioning to humans. However, these service
benefits directly impact other services due to dramatic changes in land use and
associated air, water and soil pollution.

<table class="table table-sm">
  <caption>
  Summary of nature's ecosystem services it provides to humans
  </caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th class="w-25">Group</th>
      <th>Service</th>
      <th>Historical 50-year trend</th>
      <th>Details/examples</th>
    <tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td rowspan="6"><strong>Provisioning services</strong> that support the production of renewable resources.</td></tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Food and feed</td>
      <td class="text-success">Increase</td>
      <td>Such as crops and fisheries, feeding humans directly and indirectly with livestock.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Energy</td>
      <td class="text-success">Increase</td>
      <td>Such as biofuels.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Raw materials</td>
      <td class="text-success">Increase</td>
      <td>Such as wood for construction and natural fibres for clothing.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Freshwater</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Water is essential for human life and for the cultivation of crops.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Medicinal, biochemical and genetic resources</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>For example, new antibiotics are discovered in nature, rather than being created artifically.</td>
    </tr>
    <!-- -->
    <tr><td rowspan="9"><strong>Regulating services</strong> that lessen environmental change.</td></tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Regulation of climate</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline*</td>
      <td>By sequestration of carbon dioxide to reduce the effects of global warming.
          *The capacity of the oceans to do this has remained constant in this period.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Regulation of local climate and air quality</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Examples including shade from trees, forests influencing rainfall and plants regulating air quality by removing pollutants.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Moderation of extreme events and natural disasters</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Such as floods, storms, tsunamis, landslides and droughts.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Regulation of freshwater and coastal water quality</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Such as treatment of waste water to eliminate harmful pathogens.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Regulation of freshwater flow</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Which affects the quantity, location and timing of freshwater.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Regulation of soil fertility and prevention of soil erosion.</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Fertility refers to the ability of soil to sustain plant growth, and erosion is the displacement of soil, most immediately impacting crop production.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Biological control of disease and pests</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Such as by the control of the population of a species that acts as a vector for a disease by another, perhaps predatory, species.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Pollination of plants</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>To enable reproduction of many plants.</td>
    </tr>
    <!-- -->
    <tr><td rowspan="3"><strong>Supporting services</strong> that provide a basis for all ecosystems and their biodiversity with habitats and genetic diversity.</td></tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Soil formation</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>To provide a habitat for many types of plant.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Nutrient cycling</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>To provide the necessary mineral nutrients, including water, to organisms.</td>
    </tr>
    <!-- -->
    <tr><td rowspan="5"><strong>Cultural services</strong> are non-material human benefits.</td></tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Recreation and mental and physical health in natural spaces</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Such as walking, running or sports in a park.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Tourism though the enjoyment of nature</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Benefiting those experiencing nature, as well as providing income for those facilitating it.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Aesthetic appreciation and inspiration for culture, art and design</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Much of culture, art and design draws on the natural world.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Spiritual experience and sense of place</td>
      <td class="text-danger">Decline</td>
      <td>Nature is a common element of most religions.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<!-- Summary of drivers and impacts of declining nature -->

<!-- Increasing consumption -->

Since 1970, the global population has more than doubled (3.7 billion to 7.6
billion), global trade has increased ten fold and average GDP has increased
four fold. It is estimated there has been a 15% per-capita increase in
consumption globally and this is compounded by increasing levels of
long-distance goods transportation. Increased consumption, along with
technological development, has driven increased production of food, materials
and fuels, and has driven urbanisation, which is reflected in global
statistics:

- Crop production has increased 300% since 1970.
- Timber production has increased by 50% since 1970.
- Extraction of resources has almost doubled since 1980.
- Urban areas have more than doubled since 1992.

<!--
Drivers:
 Land use change (agriculture, degradation)
 Direct exploitation
 Climate change
 pollution
 invasive species
-->

Consequently, the primary driver of biodiversity loss in terrestrial and
freshwater ecosystems is **land-use change**, closely followed by **direct
exploitation** through harvesting, logging and hunting. In marine ecosystems,
direct exploitation through fishing is the primary driver, followed by
land-/sea-use change. Together these issues account for more than 50% of the
global impact on nature, but approximately 30% is this is attributable to three
other significant factors: **climate change**, **pollution** and **invasive
alien species**.
<!-- UN summary -->
The UN Global Assessment Report summarises human impact thus: 75% of the
earth's land surface is now significantly altered, 66% of the oceans are
significantly altered, and global indicators of the condition of biodiversity
and ecosystems indicate a 47% decrease from before human impacts, with a
continuing decline of approximately 4% per decade.

A [recent report by the Swiss Re global insurance company][swiss-re-report]
concludes that 20% of the world's countries are at risk of their ecosystems
collapsing due to a decline in biodiversity and consequent ecosystem services
decline. (Ecosystem [collapse][wiki-eco-collapse] is when processes and
features supporting life are reduced or disappear, typically leading to a
drastic reduction in the number of organisms living in an environment, and
often mass extinction.) Swiss Re frame this decline as a critical issue because
they estimate 55% of global GDP depends on high-functioning biodiversity and
ecosystem services. The graphic below summarises the global distribution of the
problem with an index developed by Swiss Re to compare biodiversity and
ecosystem services by aggregating data across indicators. Included [in the
index][swiss-re-index] are habitat intactness, pollination, air quality and
local climate, water security, soil fertility, erosion control, coastal
protection, food provision and timber provision.

{{ macros.image('nature/Swiss-Re-biodiversity-ecosystems-services.jpg', size='w=650',
                 caption='Swiss Re Institute global biodiversity index.') }}


## Terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems

<div class="float-right" width="400px">
{{ macros.image('nature/glo-land-use.png', size='w=400',
               caption='Transformation of land use over the last 8,000 years, from UN Global Land Outlook 2017.') }}
</div>

<!-- Agriculture -->

Growth in consumption has driven land-use change and now 33% of the Earth's
land surface is dedicated to crop and animal agriculture. Such is the scale of
this production, that it is responsible for 25% of greenhouse emissions (18%
for animals and 7% for plants), and it consumes 75% of global freshwater
resources. Destruction of habitats is a primary driver for  biodiversity loss
and the expansion of agriculture has mainly replaced tropical forests, wetlands
and grasslands, which are home to the highest levels of biodiversity, as well
as providing huge carbon sinks, protecting against extreme weather events and
are difficult or impossible to replace.
<!---->
Compared with pre-industrial times, it is estimated that 30% of global habitats
have lost the ability to support long-term survival for the species they
accommodate.

<!-- Forests -->

**Forests** cover 31% of the Earth's land area and harbour most of terrestrial
biodiversity, but are distributed unequally.
Tropical and subtropical forest accounts for 42% of global cover, of the
remaining cover, 24% is in boreal regions and 22% in temperate regions (see the
[UN The State of the World's Forests report][fao-2020] graphic below).
<!---->
Globally, [it is estimated][global-tree-density] that there has been a 46%
reduction in the number of trees prior to human impacts, and approximately 10
billion trees are now felled annually. This deforestation is driven primarily
by agriculture, with secondary factors accounting for <20% of total
deforestation being urban, infrastructure and mining expansion.
<!---->
In Latin America for example, 100 million hectares (or 1 million square km, or
four times the land area of the UK) of tropical forest were lost in the period
1980 to 2000, mainly to cattle and palm oil plantations, and this ecosystem
destruction continues today, pushing areas of the Amazon to a tipping point
where [rainforest is converted to open savannah][amazon-destruction]. There is
also a [strong link][deforestation-viruses] between deforestation and the
emergence of dangerous novel viruses.

Of the remaining forests, 66% have been [subject to human impacts][fao-2020]
causing significant changes to their ecological processes and ability to
naturally regenerate. Forests are being degraded primarily by logging for raw
material and fuel, with secondary factors accounting for <20% of total
degradation being forest fires and livestock.
<!---->
Due to the expansion of new forest area, the net rate of forest loss has
decreased by 50% since 1990 (an estimated 16 million hectares per year,
compared with 10 million between 2015 to 2020), which is encouraging but still
falls short of increasing forest cover in the near term to mitigate climate
change and to preserve biodiversity. Replacement of old growth forests is not
one-for-one: the ability of trees to absorb carbon dioxide [improves with
age][trees-absorb-co2] and establishment of new forests also takes
decades.

{{ macros.pair_layout(
     macros.image('nature/fao-global-tree-cover-ecological-zone.png', size='w=500',
                 caption='Forests by ecological zone.'),
     macros.image('nature/fao-deforestation-drivers.png', size='w=500',
                 caption='Drivers of deforestation and degradation.'),
    caption='From the UN The State of the World\'s Forests report 2020') }}

<!-- Wetlands -->

**Wetlands** are inland areas of water such as lakes, rivers, floodplains,
swamps, marshes, peatlands, mangroves and coral reefs, and include artificial
areas such as reservoirs and rice paddies. Wetlands provide additional
important ecosystem services: water purification and a source of food. More
than 85% have been lost between 1700 (pre-industrial times) to 2000, and this
has accelerated: the rate of destruction has been approximately three times
faster than that of forests with 30% lost between 1970 and 2008. This
destruction is driven primarily by land-use change due to agriculture, but also
climate change, direct extraction and pollution. Globally, there are [now
approximately][wetland-area] 5.7 million square kilometres of wetlands, or 6%
of global land area. Creation of artificial wetlands has also accelerated,
accounting for 12% of the total area, with [mixed impacts][artificial-wetlands]
on wildlife.

<!-- Land degradation, soils -->

Once land has been converted to agricultural purposes from pristine habitats,
it is further subject to **degradation**, primarily from intensive practices
that do not allow soil to naturally regenerate between harvests and abundantly
use chemicals for fertilisation and pest control. Secondary drivers are
urbanisation, development of infrastructure, production of energy and mining.
The UN's [Global Land Outlook report][global-land-outlook] states that over the
last 20 years, approximately 20% of land supporting the growth of plants shows
persistent declining trends in productivity (16% of forests, 19% of grasslands
and 27% of rangeland). The impacts vary significantly by region, with Africa
and Europe having some of the highest levels of land degradation, with effects
of future food production insecurity, water insecurity and reduced protection
against extreme weather events.

<!-- Pollution -->

Although land-use change and direct exploitation are dominant factors in the
decline of terrestrial nature, the combined **pollution** of harmful
substances and introduction of invasive alien species account for more than 20%
of the declines in nature.
<!---->
Anthropogenic pollution that negatively impacts nature takes numerous forms:
chemicals released into the air (including greenhouse gasses causing global
warming), contamination of soil and water with chemicals including
hydrocarbons, heavy metals, fertilisers and pesticides, as well as raw sewage.
Every year into the world's waters, more than 80% of global untreated
wastewater and 300-400 million tons of industrial waste is discharged.
<!---->
The introduction of invasive terrestrial species have risen approximately 70%
since 1970, due mainly to the growth of long-distance transport of goods and
people, but increasingly from changing climates enabling habitation in new
areas. Alien species can have significant direct effects on new ecosystems because
of a lack of natural predators, because they carry diseases and because they
outcompete native wildlife or prey on them. They can case indirect detrimental effects
through impacting the ecosystem by, for example, changing soil chemistry or the
intensity of wildfires. Alien species are a particular problem in marine
ecosystems and are discussed in the next section.

Climate change, which is discussed in the final section, has a relatively
smaller impact, but one that is increasing rapidly, and simultaneously
exacerbating other drivers.



## The oceans and marine ecosystems

The oceans cover approximately 70% of the earth's surface, account for 90% of
the earth's ecosystems and hold 97% of the earth's water. In marine ecosystems
the primary driver of biodiversity loss is fishing, closely followed by sea and
coastal land-use change. Only 3% of the ocean is now considered to be free from
human impacts.

<!-- Carbon sequestration and acidification -->

The vastness of the oceans have provided a significant buffer against the
effects global warming by absorbing huge quantities of CO<sub>2</sub> and heat.
Between 2009-2018, the oceans absorbed 23% of global CO<sub>2</sub> emissions,
however absorption of CO<sub>2</sub> comes at the cost of **acidification**,
meaning a decrease in the pH level. Since the 1980s, pH has been decreasing by
0.017-0.027 pH units per decade. Acidification is known to reduce the ability
of marine organisms to form hard parts such as shells and skeletons, affecting
their ability to grow and reproduce, but the exact effects on different species
and their ecosystems is not yet well understood. This situation is not easy to
remedy: if CO<sub>2</sub> emissions were to stop today, we would see a lag of
one or more decades where acidification would continue and it is expected that
it would take tens to hundreds of thousands of years for the oceans to return
to a normal pH level. As a point of comparison, the largest extinction event of
marine life [occurred approximately 55 million years ago][PETM] when global
temperatures increased by 5-8 C with a rate of carbon emissions 16 times less
than we have now, and over a course of 30,000 years.

<!-- Heat sink -->

The oceans are also estimated to have absorbed [90% of the energy accumulation
from global warming between 1971 and 2010][ipcc-ar5-spm], which equates to a
0.11 C rise in the upper 75 m of water from 0.09-0.13 C. The effects of **ocean
heating** are thermal expansion causing sea level rise (accounting for ~30% of
the observed rise), increased melting of sea ice, increased **stratification**,
reduced sequestering of atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> and altering of ocean
currents and storm tracks. In 2019, the global average sea temperature reached
the highest recorded value, and more than [84% of the ocean][mhw-84pc]
experienced at least one abnormally high temperature event.

<!-- Stratification -->

Stratification occurs when the sea's surface warms but the water underneath
does not, or because runoff from ice melt leads to a layer of less-salty water.
Such a differential prevents **nutrient-rich water** from upwelling and mixing
with the warmer, lighter water that supports more biodiversity, depriving
marine life such as corals and algae, from food.

<!-- Deoxygenation -->

Ocean heating also causes the upper layer to be **deoxygenated** because oxygen
is less soluble as water warms, making it harder for marine organisms that
depend on oxygen to survive. Water with oxygen saturation between 1-30% is
called [**hypoxic**][hypoxia] which leads to the death of fish and
invertebrates such as worms and clams. Water with oxygen below 1% is called
anoxic. In 2008, it was estimated that there were 400 hypoxic or anoxic 'dead
zones', totalling 245,000 km$2$. Compounding these issues are feedback effects:
warming water increases the metabolic rate of marine organisms that produce
oxygen causing them to respire more and generate less oxygen; additionally, the
lack of nutrients due to stratification inhibits photosynthesis by organisms
such as [phytoplankton][phytoplankton] (microscopic organisms that create
organic compounds including oxygen from dissolved CO<sub>2</sub>).

<!-- Oxygenated waters -->

Because the oceans are so vast, it might not seem that deoxygenation and
hypoxic areas pose a significant threat to marine ecosystems, but the area in
which oxygen-rich waters occur is bounded by a naturally-occurring
**oxygen-minimum zone** located beyond the continental shelves. The result is a
narrow region of water on the coast of the continents, with only the upper
part of the water column suitable for supporting most marine life. As hypoxic
and anoxic regions grow, the part of the ocean supporting most marine life is
shrinking, and the combination of deoxygenation and decreased nutrient supply is
destabilising the base of complex food webs and ecosystems.

As if the effects of climate change on marine ecosystems were not bad enough,
they are under attack from other issues including overfishing, eutrophication
and pollution, and foreign species.

<!-- Fishing -->

**Fishing** [accounts][wwf-fishforward-facts] for the extraction of
approximately 110 million tonnes of fish and invertebrates every year, having
increased from 28 million tonnes in 1950, and is the primary driver of
biodiversity loss in oceans. Peak catches were in 1996 at 130 million tonnes,
and have been declining at 1.2 million tonnes annually since then. Of these
quantities, approximately 35% is bycatch and discarded and 12-18% is illegal
and unregulated. More than 55% of ocean area is now subject to industrial
fishing. Destructive and poorly-regulated practices like [bottom
trawling](bottom-trawling) further cause almost irreparable habitat destruction
for reefs, sponges and shellfish. These factors have led to a situation
where 33% of fish stocks are caught at unsustainable levels, 60% are maximally
sustainably fished and only 7% are underfished. Global populations of sharks and
rays have [declined by 71% since 1970](https://www.ecowatch.com/shark-population-overfishing-2650168793.html).

{{ macros.image('nature/Global-Fishing-Watch-Fishing-activity.png', size='w=600',
    caption='Global fishing activity 2016 (Global Fishing Watch)') }}

**Eutrophication** is a particular kind of pollution where excess nutrients
  are deposited in water, typically by land runoff or direct discharge of
nitrogen and phosphorus from fertilisers used in agriculture, in industry or
from sewage. The effect is that water becomes stratified into a layer where
phytoplankton and other algaes rapidly multiply to create huge blooms. These
blooms lower the oxygen levels in the water, can produce toxins and reduce the
sunlight entering the water. Blooms can last days to months, and when they die
their decomposition further deoxygenates the water, creating longer-lasting
effects. Globally, algal blooms due to eutrophication are becoming more
frequent and more toxic, in 2018 there were [300 reported
incidents][algal-blooms-reported] reported worldwide.

<!-- Non-nutrient pollution -->

There are many other forms of **non-nutrient marine pollution**, including any
substance or object introduced that has a harmful effect on ecosystems. There
are a vast array of non-nutrient pollutants, each with their own harmful
effects, but including pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, hydrocarbons, oil
spills, plastics, heavy metals, radioactive waste and hot water from power
stations. Like nutrient pollution, non-nutrient pollutants typically come from
diffuse sources such as land runoff, wind-blown debris, atmospheric emissions,
shipping, and oil extraction. These sources include waste material or chemicals
from industrial, agricultural and residential activities. Industrial activities
that do discharge contaminants directly into waterways or by incineration,
discharge them as airborne particles that eventually settle. For example:
pesticides are widely used in plant agriculture and antibiotics and growth
hormones in livestock agriculture, transport produces substantial oil and
rubber residues, and domestic use of a variety of chemicals and medicines leads
to contaminants eventually finding their way into watercourses. To give one
example it is estimated that the amount of plastic pollution has increased
tenfold since 1980, and that 4 to 12 million tonnes of plastic entered the
oceans in just one year in 2010. The [Great Pacific Garbage Patch][GPGP] is
estimated to be 700,000 square km and containing 80,000 tonnes of waste.

<!-- Foreign species -->

The introduction of **foreign species** into non-native habitats is another
form of ocean pollution that has dramatic, negative effects on marine
ecosystems and biodiversity. The movement happens primarily via the ballast
water of ships. When a ship is docked, it will fill internal water reservoirs to
counterbalance cargo. When the ship arrives at its destination and has
unloaded, it will discharge its ballast, along with whatever stowaways it
contains, from fish to microscopic organisms. Plastics are being recognised as
another vector for species movement, with organisms that can attach themselves
to floating plastic debris such as jellyfish polyps and algae. Recorded
invasive species have doubled in the last 50 years, and the threat posed is
acknowledged to be one of the [main drivers impacting global
biodiversity][ocean-project-invasive].



## Global warming

Global warming induced climate change has a broad impact on nature and
interacts with many of the other drivers discussed, exacerbating the negative
impacts. With an accelerating rate of climate change, it poses a significant
and growing risk to nature and humans.

There are clear indicators of the drivers and effects of global warming due to
anthropogenic emissions (hazardous emissions caused by humans), as shown by the
charts below. Atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) is
at 408 parts per million and 147% more than pre-industrial levels (PIL, of
which 1750 is used as a representative baseline); methane (CH<sub>4</sub>) is
at 1,870 parts per billion and 259% more than PIL; and nitrous oxide
(N<sub>2</sub>O) is at 331 parts per billion and 123% of PIL. As a consequence,
the global mean temperature and the global mean sea level are 1.2C and 20 cm
higher respectively than PIL with year-on-year records being set. Temperature
and sea-level rises are variable across the globe, for instance the Arctic has
been experiencing sustained higher-than-average temperatures. The global oxygen
(O<sub>2</sub>) level has been declining since it was first measured in 1991,
approximately 0.05% higher than the present day.

{{ macros.image('nature/Climate-levels.png', size='w=800',
                 caption='Climate Levels (2 Degrees Institute).') }}

The 2018 [IPCC 'Global Warming of 1.5C' report](https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15) sets
out the current status and trajectory of planetary temperature. Humans have
caused approximately 1.2C of global warming since pre industrial levels.
Historical emissions of greenhouse gasses are likely to cause further warming
of 0.5C over the next two to three decades, with effects persisting for
millennia. In other words, the possibility of avoiding 1.5C warming is now
vanishingly small, even if there was an immediate halt of anthropogenic
emissions. This puts us on a pathway of warming from 1-2 C warming and beyond,
which is predicted to have significantly worse effects compared with 1.5C until
the end of the century, [including][ipcc-15-report-ch3]:

<div class="float-right" width="400px">
{{ macros.image('nature/NSIDC-arctic-sea-ice-extent-2012.png', size='w=300',
    caption='Sea ice extent Sep 2012, National Snow and Ice Data Center Boulder.') }}
</div>

 - More frequent **extreme weather events** including heatwaves, heavy precipitation,
   severe drought, with effects including large-scale wild fires and flooding.
 - **Higher average temperatures**, with increases being 2 to 3 times greater
   in some regions.
 - More frequent **ice-free Arctic**, once per decade rather than once per century, with
   consequences for ocean circulation and more warming due to less reflection
   of heat (see 2012 ice extent image, showing a 12% loss per decade since 1979).
   2020 has continued the trend with a [later than ever][oct-2020-arctic] ice-free
   arctic. Similar reductions in ice affect polar mountain glaciers and ice sheets.
 - Increased **sea level rise** driven by ocean warming and melting ice: 10cm
   more by 2100, affecting approximately 10.4 million more people.
 - Potential to trigger **instabilities in the Greenland and Antarctic ice
   sheets**, which would result in multi-meter sea-level rises.

These effects have consequent impacts in terrestrial ecosystems:

 - **Species habitat loss** through reduction in their climatically determined
   geographic range, a total of 6% to 18% loss for insects, 8% to 16% loss for
   plants and 4% to 8% loss for vertebrates. Some species will adapt by moving
   further north, but some will not be able to. Other species will exploit the
   opportunity, to move into areas once too cold, often with detrimental
   effects.
 - **Transformation of terrestrial and wetland ecosystems**, such as the expansion
   of desert, is 13% globally, vs 4% at 1.5C.
 - **Thawing of permafrost** with an area of 1.5 to 2.5 million km$^2$, which is
   approximately 40% of the arctic's permafrost.

In ocean ecosystems:

 - **Tropical coral reef loss** is almost total at >99%, compared with 70-90% lost at 1.5C.
 - Substantial **changes to ocean chemistry** leading to acidification, hypoxia and dead zones.
 - Increasing numbers of jellyfish, particularly in blooms.

On water resources:

 - Increase in **water scarcity** by up to 50%.
 - Reduced **food security** caused by reduced crop yields, reduced fisheries
   (twice the level of decline compared with 1.5C) and reduced production
   livestock.
 - Substantial **decline in fisheries productivity** at low latitudes.

And impact humans as well:

 - Substantial increase in human exposure to **flooding**, affecting 10 million
   more people.
 - Increased negative consequences to **human health** due to heat, diseases
   and malnutrition, with greater risks in urban areas.
 - **Pest species** such as mosquitos and ticks that spread disease, and locusts
   and beetles that ruin crops.
 - Increased **poverty**.

Limiting global warming to 1.5-2 C requires nothing short of immediate and
dramatic reductions in global emissions to reach net zero CO<sub>2</sub> and
similar reductions in gasses such as methane, but policy and aspirations fall
short of the change necessary. The charts below illustrate the different
pathways that can be taken, and this stark contrast: current pledges and
targets fall 50% short of the expected reduction of emissions to limit warming
to 1.5 C under the Paris agreement and 30% of the expected emissions for 2 C.
By the end of the century, we will end up with around 4 C of warming if we
carry on as normal, but still almost 3 C with the realisation of current policy
and pledges.

{{ macros.pair_layout(
    macros.image('nature/CAT-Graph-2030EmissionsGaps-2020.09.original.png', size='w=500',
                 caption='Climate Action Tracker 2030 emissions gaps.'),
    macros.image('nature/CAT-2100WarmingProjectionsGraph-2020.09.original.png', size='w=500',
                 caption='Climate Action Tracker 2100 warming projections.')) }}

<!--
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/chapter-3/
https://www.wri.org/blog/2018/10/half-degree-and-world-apart-difference-climate-impacts-between-15-c-and-2-c-warming
https://www.carbonbrief.org/scientists-compare-climate-change-impacts-at-1-5c-and-2c
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/07/climate-change-earth-too-hot-for-humans.html
-->


## Final thoughts

This note attempts to concisely and objectively summarise the issues
surrounding human impact on nature. Since I'm not an expert, it necessarily
skims along the top of what are hugely complex issues. What I do hope however
is that it conveys the magnitude and gravity of the situation for nature on
earth and how the contributing issues are deeply interconnected.

<!--I also hope that it serves as a resource to aid understanding and as a
contemporaneous reference for those taking part in related discussions.-->

Climate change is now beginning to be taken more seriously and is increasingly
becoming part of normal discourse. But the declines in biodiversity and
ecosystem services are generally poorly understood and regarded as risks, but
currently have a disproportionately greater impact on humans with issues such
as access to freshwater, air pollution and protection from extreme weather.
The UN Global Assessment Report finds that negative trends in nature will
continue until 2050 and beyond due to the projected impacts of increasing land-use
change, exploitation of organisms and climate change under current
trajectories. These impacts will also be distributed unevenly and will affect
many of the world's indigenous people and poorest communities first.

The ongoing assessment of the state of nature and modelling of the future are
imperfect and we cannot fully understand the consequences of human actions.
What we can be sure about however is that our situation is unprecedented in
history. Measured against the earth's history, the time frame for these effects
to become catastrophic is just a blink of an eye. Should things change
dramatically tomorrow, many of these impacts are locked in for decades.
Momentum to mitigate these issues is building but will it be enough, and in
time?

The UN report concludes that avoiding such a scenario requires systematic,
transformative change across across economic, social, political and
technological factors. Everyone has a part to play.

<!--
World fails to meet a single target to stop destruction of nature – UN report
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/sep/15/every-global-target-to-stem-destruction-of-nature-by-2020-missed-un-report-aoe
'Lost decade for nature' as UK fails on 17 of 20 UN biodiversity targets
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2020/sep/14/lost-decade-for-nature-as-uk-fails-on-17-of-20-un-biodiversity-targets-aoe
-->

## References / further reading

[deepadaptation]: https://jembendell.com/2019/05/15/deep-adaptation-versions/
[wwf-living-planet]: https://livingplanet.panda.org/en-us/
[ecosystems]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecosystem
[biodiversity-loss-humanity]: https://pub.epsilon.slu.se/10240/7/wardle_d_etal_130415.pdf
[wiki-holocene-extinction]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene_extinction
[biomass-distribution]: https://www.pnas.org/content/115/25/6506
[biomass-distribution-summary]: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/may/21/human-race-just-001-of-all-life-but-has-destroyed-over-80-of-wild-mammals-study
[fao-eco-services]: http://www.fao.org/ecosystem-services-biodiversity/en/
[ecosystem-functioning]: http://uknea.unep-wcmc.org/EcosystemAssessmentConcepts/EcosystemFunctioning/tabid/100/Default.aspx
[swiss-re-report]: https://www.swissre.com/media/news-releases/nr-20200923-biodiversity-and-ecosystems-services.html
[swiss-re-index]: https://www.swissre.com/institute/research/topics-and-risk-dialogues/climate-and-natural-catastrophe-risk/expertise-publication-biodiversity-and-ecosystems-services.html
[wiki-eco-collapse]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecosystem_collapse
[un-bes]: https://ipbes.net/global-assessment
[un-bes-blog]: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2019/05/nature-decline-unprecedented-report/
[amazon-destruction]: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/oct/05/amazon-near-tipping-point-of-switching-from-rainforest-to-savannah-study
[global-tree-density]: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature14967
[deforestation-viruses]: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/aug/30/rampant-destruction-of-forests-will-unleash-more-pandemics
[fao-2020]: http://www.fao.org/3/ca8985en/CA8985EN.pdf
[wetland-area]: https://www.ramsar.org/sites/default/files/documents/library/info2007-01-e.pdf
[global-land-outlook]: https://knowledge.unccd.int/glo/GLO_first_edition
[ipcc-15-report-ch3]: https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/chapter-3/
[ipcc-ar5-spm]: http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/report/WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf
[oct-2020-arctic]: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/oct/22/alarm-as-arctic-sea-ice-not-yet-freezing-at-latest-date-on-record
[mhw-84pc]: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/03/state-oceans-200310152317671.html
[hypoxia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypoxia_(environmental)
[phytoplankton]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phytoplankton
[PETM]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paleocene%E2%80%93Eocene_Thermal_Maximum
[wwf-fishforward-facts]: https://www.fishforward.eu/en/topics/facts-figures/
[bottom-trawling]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bottom_trawling
[algal-blooms-reported]: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/jan/04/lethal-algae-blooms-an-ecosystem-out-of-balance
[GPGP]: https://marinedebris.noaa.gov/movement/great-pacific-garbage-patch
[ocean-project-invasive]: https://www.oceanprotect.org/resources/issue-briefs/invasive-species/
[trees-absorb-co2]: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/09/080910133934.htm
[artificial-wetlands]: https://academic.oup.com/bioscience/article/65/4/346/255153

- [Climate Action Tracker](https://climateactiontracker.org/global/cat-emissions-gaps), 2030 emissions gaps.
- [Climate Levels](https://www.climatelevels.org/), live graphs of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gasses and global mean temperature, sea level and oxygen level.
- [Deep Adaptation: A Map for Navigating Climate Tragedy][deepadaptation], Jem Bendell, 2018.
- [Global biodiversity outlook 5](https://www.cbd.int/gbo5), Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity 2020.
- [Global Fishing Watch](https://globalfishingwatch.org/)
- [Global Forest Watch](https://www.globalforestwatch.org/)
- [Global Warming & Climate Change Myths](https://skepticalscience.com/argument.php)
- [Global Wetland Outlook: State of the World's Wetlands and their services to people](https://www.global-wetland-outlook.ramsar.org/outlook), Ramsar Convention on Wetlands 2018.
- [Ocean Pollution: Causes and Effects](https://deepoceanfacts.com/ocean-pollution), Deep Ocean Facts.
- [One Ocean Project, issue briefs](https://www.oceanprotect.org/resources/issue-briefs/)
- [State of the World's Forests 2020. In brief](http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/ca8985en)
- Stung! On Jellyfish Blooms and the Future of the Ocean, [Lisa-ann Gershwin](http://lisagershwin.com), 2013.
- [Swiss Re Institute's report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services: A business case for re/insurance](https://www.swissre.com/institute/research/topics-and-risk-dialogues/climate-and-natural-catastrophe-risk/expertise-publication-biodiversity-and-ecosystems-services.html) ([Guardian coverage](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/oct/12/fifth-of-nations-at-risk-of-ecosystem-collapse-analysis-finds))
- [The future is grim](https://medium.com/@cache_86525/the-future-is-grim-27ca6f7ab07b), Cache Baba, 2019.
- [UK National Ecosystem Assessment](http://uknea.unep-wcmc.org/) (2014).
- [UN Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services](https://ipbes.net/global-assessment) ([UN blog article with good summary of facts](https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2019/05/nature-decline-unprecedented-report/)) ([Guardian coverage](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/may/06/human-society-under-urgent-threat-loss-earth-natural-life-un-report))
- [UN Global Environment Outlook 6](https://www.unenvironment.org/resources/global-environment-outlook-6), 2019.
- [UN Global Land Outlook](https://knowledge.unccd.int/glo/GLO_first_edition), UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), 2017. ([Guardian coverage](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/sep/12/third-of-earths-soil-acutely-degraded-due-to-agriculture-study))
- [UN State of The World's Forests 2020 report](http://www.fao.org/state-of-forests/en/), UN Food and Agriculture Organization.
- [WWF Living Planet Report 2018: Aiming Higher](https://wwf.panda.org/knowledge_hub/all_publications/living_planet_report_2018/) ([Guardian coverage](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/30/humanity-wiped-out-animals-since-1970-major-report-finds))
- [WWF Living Planet Report 2020: Bending the Curve of Biodiversity Loss](https://livingplanet.panda.org/en-us/) ([Guardian coverage](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/sep/10/humans-exploiting-and-destroying-nature-on-unprecedented-scale-report-aoe))
- [World Meteorological Organization, Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2019](https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10211)
- [World of Change](https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/world-of-change), satellite imagery of the changing Earth surface from NASA Earth Observatory.
