Title: About
Status: published

{% import 'post-macros.html' as macros %}

<img class="img-fluid" src="{{'mugshot-trees.jpg'|thumbnail('600x600')}}" alt="James W Hanlon">

# About me

I currently work at [XTX Markets](https://www.xtxmarkets.com) as a silicon
engineer. Between 2016 and 2023, I worked at the UK-based chip company
[Graphcore](http://www.graphcore.ai), where I was involved in many aspects of
the design and implementation of their AI accelerator. Prior to Graphcore, I
have worked as a software engineer specialising in the compiler toolchain at
[XMOS](http://www.xmos.com) for their embedded parallel processors, and as a
technical consultant at [Red Oak Consulting](http://www.redoakconsulting.co.uk)
in Cheltenham, who specialise in services for high-performance computing.

I completed a PhD at the [University of Bristol](http://www.bris.ac.uk) in the
[Department of Computer Science](http://www.cs.bris.ac.uk) in 2014, with a
thesis entitled *[Scalable abstractions for general-purpose parallel
computation]({filename}/thesis.md)*, which investigated the relationship
between the hardware implementation of highly-parallel computers and
programming languages and software for them. I hold a masters degree in
Computer Science from the same institution.

Since it's inception in 2015, I helped to found and run [The CHEESE
Project](http://www.cheeseproject.co.uk), a not-for-profit enterprise that uses
thermal imaging to encourage people to reduce their domestic energy losses. For
those who struggle to heat their homes, it improves their health and well being
and for those who have thermally-inefficient homes, it saves them money and
reduces their carbon emissions. As part of the expansion of CHEESE nationwide,
I have helped to found [First Thermal](http://www.first-thermal.co.uk), a
social franchise to replicate the approach.

There are some more CV-related details on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jameswhanlon).


# About this website

My intention with this website is to provide somewhere for me to
[archive](/archive.html) my old academic work, and a way to publish notes on
topics that interest me and details of projects that I've undertaken in my
spare time. These notes are written primarily as a record for myself, but they
are publicly available in the hope they will be useful to others. I'd
love to hear from you if that's the case.

This website is built using [Pelican](https://blog.getpelican.com), a static
website generator written in Python. The theme is simply derived from
[Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com) and it is hosted on GitHub Pages. The
source code is available for
[reuse](https://github.com/jameshanlon/jameshanlon.github.io). I track visitors
using the excellent [GoatCounter](https://www.goatcounter.com).

# Related links

You can find me elsewhere on the internet:

* [GitHub](https://github.com/jameshanlon)
* [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:JamieHanlon)
* [Strava](https://www.strava.com/athletes/5351937)

If you'd like to get in touch, then please email me at *mail @ this domain*.
